---
layout: post
title: "Lookout at FOSDEM 2015"
tags:
- opensource
- fosdem
- fosdem2015
---


Every year, thousands of open source hackers and enthusiasts flock to
[Brussels](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brussels) in Belgium for
[FOSDEM](https://fosdem.org/2015/), the Free and Open Source Developers
European Meeting. In short, FOSDEM is a place for thousands of self-organizing
and passionate open source hackers to share code, tools and ideas while
ingesting thousands of liters of
[Club-Mate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Club_mate) and beer.

For the past few years [I](https://github.com/rtyler) have personally been
involved in organizing the "Testing and Automation" devroom, which will be [on
the schedule again this
year](https://fosdem.org/2015/schedule/track/testing_and_automation/). Never
satisfied with a relaxing day at FOSDEM, this year I'm also helping to organize the
**first [Ruby devroom](https://fosdem.org/2015/schedule/track/ruby/)** at
FOSDEM (disclaimer: there was a [Ruby +
Rails](https://archive.fosdem.org/2008/schedule/devroom/rubyonrails.html)
devroom from 2008-2010).


As Lookout is getting [more involved in
JRuby](/2014/12/jruby-sponsored-in-part-by-lookout), I'm happy to say that
both [Christian Meier](https://github.com/mkristian) and myself will be in
attendance for the entirety of the event.


I'm personally very excited that Lookout is going to be present for the second
consecutive year at FOSDEM and that the conference continues to have an
incredible amount of great technical content.


If you're going to be at FOSDEM and are interested in meeting up and talking
about Lookout, Ruby, Test/Automation or how stinkin' cold it is outside, ping
[me](https://twitter.com/agentdero) or
[@LookoutEng](https://twitter.com/lookouteng) on Twitter.

Hope to see you there!


- [R. Tyler Croy](https://github.com/rtyler)
